A phased, diploid assembly of the Cascade hop (Humulus lupulus) genome reveals patterns of selection and haplotype variation

ABSTRACT

Hop (Humulus lupulus L. var Lupulus) is a diploid, dioecious plant with a history of cultivation spanning more than one thousand years. Hop cones are valued for their use in brewing, and around the world, hop has been used in traditional medicine to treat a variety of ailments, including anxiety, insomnia, and pain. Efforts to uncover the regulation of the biochemical pathways responsible for these desirable traits have been challenged by the large, repetitive, and heterozygous genome of hop, and many questions regarding the hop genome remain unanswered. Haploid, short-read assemblies are fragmented and incomplete, containing collapsed regions that thwart the investigation of repeats, genes embedded within repeats, gene copy number, and heterozygosity. We present the first report of a haplotype phased assembly of the hop cultivar Cascade using PacBio long-read sequencing. Assembly was performed with FALCON and phasing with FALCON-Unzip. It is the most extensive assembly and gene annotation of the hop genome to date. 

Comparative analysis of haplotypes provides insight into large scale structural variation and the selective pressures that have driven hop evolution. Previous studies estimated hop genome content at around 60%, but with improved resolution of long terminal retrotransposons (LTRs) due to long-read sequencing, we found that hop is nearly 78% repetitive. The more accurate quantification of repeat content sheds light on the size of the hop genome, and supports the hypothesis of whole genome duplication, rather than expansion due to LTRs. With our more complete assembly, we have identified a homolog of cannabidiolic acid synthase (CBDAS) that is expressed in multiple tissues. The diploid assembly has enabled our analysis of haplotype variation, which reveals growth, development, and stress response genes under positive selection. The approaches we have developed to analyze the phased, diploid assembly of hop serve to deepen our understanding of the genomic landscape of hop and may have broader applicability to the study of other large, complex genomes.
